Add the SLP5 Release Note (#1420)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-preview5/RELEASE_NOTE.md

### Updating Ballerina

You can use the update tool to update to Ballerina Swan Lake Preview 5 as follows.

#### For existing users

If you are already using Ballerina, you can directly update your distribution to the Swan Lake channel using the [Ballerina Update Tool](http://ballerina.io/swan-lake/learn/keeping-ballerina-up-to-date/). To do this, first, execute the command below to get the update tool updated to its latest version. 
                        
> `ballerina update`

 Next, execute the command below to update to Swan Lake Preview 5.

 > `ballerina dist pull slp5b1`                 

However, if you are using a Ballerina version below 1.1.0, install via the [installers](https://ballerina.io/downloads/).

#### For new users

If you have not installed Ballerina, then download the [installers](https://ballerina.io/downloads/) to install.

### What is new in Ballerina Swan Lake Preview 5

#### Language

##### Isolated objects

A class definition or an object-type descriptor can now be marked as `isolated`. All fields of an `isolated` object that are not `final` or are not a subtype of `readonly` or `isolated object {}` have to be `private` fields.

> The methods of an `isolated` object that access such fields can only refer to `self` within a `lock` statement, which ensures that mutable state is only accessed within `lock` statements. If a method accesses such a field, additional rules apply to how values are transferred in and out in order to ensure that there are no references into the object’s mutable storage except via isolated objects. The initial value expressions of the fields also need to ensure the same.

Reviewer: The first sentence, doesn't it feel like the info in the second part of the sentence is actually a repetition of what's in the first part? Shouldn't the second part be explaining why such a restriction is in place instead?

Reviewer: @MaryamZi

Reviewer 2: Do you mean the part on transferring in/out? That's actually independent of the first part.

Reviewer: No I meant the following sentence: "The methods of an `isolated` object that access such fields can only refer to `self` within a `lock` statement, which ensures that mutable state is only accessed within `lock` statements"

Reviewer 2: Just wanted to emphasize the bit about such fields being mutable. Any suggestions?

Reviewer: Yeah, I'm ok with emphasizing that. But my point was, it doesn't convey what problem it solves by restricting the use of `self` to just within `lock` statements. For example, something like "which prevents mutable state from being concurrently modified", or something of the sort, which conveys the problem this restriction addresses.

Reviewer 2: +1, the spec actually mentions data race, how about

```suggestion
The methods of an `isolated` object that access such fields can only refer to `self` within a `lock` statement, which ensures that there is no data race in accessing mutable state. If a method accesses such a field, additional rules apply to how values are transferred in and out in order to ensure that there are no references into the object’s mutable storage except via isolated objects. The initial value expressions of the fields also need to ensure the same.
```

        lock {
            return self.hotels.clone();
        }
    }
}
```

An `isolated` function can also access a `final` variable if its type is a subtype of `isolated object {}`.

```ballerina
final Hotels hotels = new;

isolated function getCoordinates() returns Coordinates[] => hotels.getCoordinates().toArray();
```

##### Removed XML functional constructors

XML functional constructor syntax has been removed. In place of XML functional constructors, `'xml:createXXX` functions should be used. 

**Disallowed syntax**
```ballerina
'xml:Element element = 'xml:Element("elem");
'xml:Comment comment = 'xml:Comment("comment content");
'xml:ProcessingInstruction proceInstruc = 'xml:ProcessingInstruction("DONOT", "print this");
'xml:Text text = 'xml:Text("this is a character sequence");
```

**Valid syntax**
```ballerina
'xml:Element element = 'xml:createElement("elem");
'xml:Comment comment = 'xml:createComment("comment content");
'xml:ProcessingInstruction proceInstruc = 'xml:createProcessingInstruction("DONOT", "print this");
'xml:Text text = 'xml:createText("this is a character sequence");
```

##### Unified object method scope and object field scope 

> Object field scope and object method scope are unified into a single object scope. This means that it's no longer possible to have fields and methods with the same name.

Reviewer: are unified or have been unified? :thinking:

Reviewer 2: I was also wondering the same. We seem to have used a mix across the release note, though.

Author: @MaryamZi

Author: "have been" sounds better. Will change.

###### More `isolated` lang library functions

These include lang library functions that accept an argument of a `function` type. With these functions, a parameter, which is of a `function` type may be annotated with the `@isolatedParam` annotation. 

```ballerina
public isolated function forEach(Type[] arr, @isolatedParam function(Type val) returns () func) returns () = external;
``` 

When such a function is called in a context where an `isolated` call is expected, the argument passed for a parameter that is annotated with `@isolatedParam` should also be an `isolated` function.

```ballerina
int total = 0;

function sum(int i) {
    total += i;
}

isolated function validate(int i) {
    if i > 100 {
        panic error(string `Invalid Value: ${i}`);
    }
}

function arraySum() {
    int[] x = [1, 2, 3];

    // Since `arraySum` is not `isolated`, non-isolated 
    // function `sum` can be passed as the argument.
    x.forEach(sum);
}

isolated function validateArray() {
    int[] x = [1, 2, 3];

    // Since `validateArray` is `isolated`, the argument 
    // should also be an `isolated` function.
    x.forEach(validate);
}
```

#### Runtime

> The Ballerina runtime Java API package name is changed from `org.ballerinalang.jvm` to `io.ballerina.runtime`. A new `io.ballerina.api.TypeCreator` API is introduced for creating Ballerina types at runtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Ballerina runtime Java API package name has been changed from `org.ballerinalang.jvm` to `io.ballerina.runtime`. A new `io.ballerina.api.TypeCreator` API is introduced to create Ballerina types at runtime.
```

#### Standard Library

> ##### HTTP client remote function API improvement with data-binding support

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be 
```suggestion
##### HTTP client remote method API improvement with data-binding support
```

@chamil321

Response payload binding functionality is provided for an HTTP client by returning the payload according to the `targetType` defaultable parameter that is mentioned in the remote function.

**Previous syntax:**
```ballerina
http:Response|error res = client->post("/path", req);
```

**New syntax:**
```ballerina
http:Response|http:Payload|error res = client->post("/path", req, json);
// or

> json payload = <json> check client->post("/path", req, json);

Reviewer 2: Since `client` is a keyword shouldn't we use some other variable name?

Author: @chamil321

Reviewer 3: Thanks, I addressed the comment.

```

##### SQL procedure call API improvement

The SQL data type of the `Out` Parameter can now be defined in the SQL procedure call API, thus, eliminating the use of metadata to configure `Out` Parameter types.

**Previous syntax:**
```ballerina
sql:OutParameter filterId = new;
```

**New Syntax**
```ballerina
sql:IntegerOutParameter filterId = new;
```

> ##### Add misfire policy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
##### Misfire policy support for tasks
```

---
layout: ballerina-blank-page
title: Release Note
---
### Overview of Ballerina Swan Lake Preview 5 

This release is the fifth preview version of Ballerina Swan Lake. This release includes a new set of language features along with improvements and bug fixes to the compiler, runtime, standard libraries, and developer tooling.

- [Updating Ballerina](#updating-ballerina)
    - [For existing users](#for-existing-users)
    - [For new users](#for-new-users)
- [What is new in Ballerina Swan Lake Preview 5](#what-is-new-in-ballerina-swan-lake-preview-5)
    - [Language](#language)
        - [Isolated objects](#isolated-objects)

>         - [Removed XML functional constructors](#removed-xml-functional-constructors)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        - [Lang lib functions to replace XML functional constructors](#lang-lib-functions-to-replace-xml-functional-constructors)
```

        - [Unified object method scope and object field scope](#unified-object-method-scope-and-object-field-scope)
        - [Improved lang library functions](#improved-lang-library-functions)
    - [Runtime](#runtime)
    - [Standard Library](#standard-library)

>         - [HTTP client remote function API improvement with data-binding support](#http-client-remote-function-api-improvement-with-data-binding-support)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        - [HTTP client remote method API improvement with data-binding support](#http-client-remote-method-api-improvement-with-data-binding-support)
```

        - [SQL procedure call API improvement](#sql-procedure-call-api-improvement)
        - [Add misfire policy](#add-misfire-policy)
    - [Developer Tools](#developer-tools)
        - [Code formatting](#code-formatting)

### Updating Ballerina

You can use the update tool to update to Ballerina Swan Lake Preview 5 as follows.

#### For existing users

If you are already using Ballerina, you can directly update your distribution to the Swan Lake channel using the [Ballerina Update Tool](http://ballerina.io/swan-lake/learn/keeping-ballerina-up-to-date/). To do this, first, execute the command below to get the update tool updated to its latest version. 
                        
> `ballerina update`

>  Next, execute the command below to update to Swan Lake Preview 4.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 Next, execute the command below to update to Swan Lake Preview 5.
```

>  > `ballerina dist pull slp5b1`                 

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't this be `ballerina dist pull slp5` ? @keizer619

Reviewer 5: yes slp5 above name is a temporary one for current build

Author: Fixed.

However, if you are using a Ballerina version below 1.1.0, install via the [installers](https://ballerina.io/downloads/).

#### For new users

If you have not installed Ballerina, then download the [installers](https://ballerina.io/downloads/) to install.

### What is new in Ballerina Swan Lake Preview 5

#### Language

##### Isolated objects

A class definition or an object-type descriptor can now be marked as `isolated`. All fields of an `isolated` object that are not `final` or are not a subtype of `readonly` or `isolated object {}` have to be `private` fields.

> The methods of an `isolated` object that access such fields can only refer to `self` within a `lock` statement, which ensures that mutable state is only accessed within `lock` statements. If a method accesses such a field, additional rules apply to how values are transferred in and out in order to ensure that there are no references into the object’s mutable storage except via isolated objects. The initial value expressions, if present, also need to ensure the same.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The methods of an `isolated` object that access such fields can only refer to `self` within a `lock` statement, which ensures that mutable state is only accessed within `lock` statements. If a method accesses such a field, additional rules apply to how values are transferred in and out in order to ensure that there are no references into the object’s mutable storage except via isolated objects. The initial value expressions of the fields also need to ensure the same.
```

'xml:ProcessingInstruction proceInstruc = 'xml:createProcessingInstruction("DONOT", "print this");
'xml:Text text = 'xml:createText("this is a character sequence");
```

##### Unified object method scope and object field scope 

Object field scope and object method scope are unified into a single object scope. This means that it's no longer possible to have fields and methods with the same name.

With this change, object methods can be accessed as object fields and the reference to `self` is captured in the resulting function pointer.

```ballerina
class Accumulator {
    int i;

    function init(int i) {
        self.i = i;
    }

    function accumulate(int acc) {
        self.i = self.i + acc;
    }

    function get() returns int {
        return self.i;
    }
}

Accumulator accumulator = new(0);
var acc = accumulator.accumulate; // access method as a field
var getVal = accumulator.get;

acc(1); // similar to calling accumulator.accumulate(1);
acc(2);
int val = getVal();
```

##### Improved lang library functions

Several changes and improvements have been introduced to the `ballerina/lang.value` lang library module.

###### New `ensureType` function

> A new `ensureType` function has been introduced to convert any kind of a Ballerina value to a user-specified type.

Reviewer 6: Shall we change this line as follow, 
```md
##### `ensureType` langlib method

This function can be used to check a value that belongs to the given type; similar to type cast expression. But this langlib method returns an error value if the type test fails. 
```

@MaryamZi @praneesha Please check.

Author: Fixed.

> ###### Improvement in accessing simple values in a JSON

Reviewer 6: Shall we move this before ##### Improved lang library functions section.

Author: Done.

> A simple value in a JSON now can directly be assigned to its type variable without casting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A non-structural value (i.e., simple value) in a JSON object can now be directly assigned to a variable of the same type, without casting.
```

> For this, the field access expression should come after the `check` keyword. The simple value should belong to one of the types: (), int, float, decimal, string, or  boolean.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this, the field access expression should be used with the `check` expression. The simple value should belong to one of the types: `()`, `int`, `float`, `decimal`, `string`, or  `boolean`.
```

``` 

When such a function is called in a context where an `isolated` call is expected, the argument passed for a parameter that is annotated with `@isolatedParam` should also be an `isolated` function.

```ballerina
int total = 0;

function sum(int i) {
    total += i;
}

isolated function validate(int i) {
    if i > 100 {
        panic error(string `Invalid Value: ${i}`);
    }
}

function arraySum() {
    int[] x = [1, 2, 3];

    // Since `arraySum` is not `isolated`, non-isolated 
    // function `sum` can be passed as the argument.
    x.forEach(sum);
}

isolated function validateArray() {
    int[] x = [1, 2, 3];

    // Since `validateArray` is `isolated`, the argument 
    // should also be an `isolated` function.
    x.forEach(validate);
}
```

#### Runtime

The Ballerina runtime Java API package name has been changed from `org.ballerinalang.jvm` to `io.ballerina.runtime`. A new `io.ballerina.api.TypeCreator` API is introduced to create Ballerina types at runtime.

#### Standard Library

##### HTTP client remote method API improvement with data-binding support

> Response payload binding functionality is provided for an HTTP client by returning the payload according to the `targetType` defaultable parameter that is mentioned in the remote function.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Response payload binding functionality is provided for an HTTP client by returning the payload according to the `targetType` defaultable parameter that is mentioned in the remote method.
```

**Previous syntax:**
```ballerina

> http:Response|error res = client->post("/path", req);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
http:Response|error res = clientEP->post("/path", req);
```

```

**New syntax:**
```ballerina

> http:Response|http:Payload|error res = client->post("/path", req, json);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
http:Response|http:Payload|error res = clientEP->post("/path", req, json);
```

// or

> json payload = <json> check client->post("/path", req, json);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
json payload = <json> check clientEP->post("/path", req, json);
```

        self.i = i;
    }

    function accumulate(int acc) {
        self.i = self.i + acc;
    }

    function get() returns int {
        return self.i;
    }
}

public function main() {
    Accumulator accumulator = new(0);
    var acc = accumulator.accumulate; // access a method as a field
    var getVal = accumulator.get;
    acc(1); // similar to calling accumulator.accumulate(1);
    acc(2);
    int val = getVal();
}
```

###### Improvement in accessing simple values in a JSON

A non-structural value (i.e., simple value) in a JSON object can now be directly assigned to a variable of the same type without casting.

For this, the field access expression should be used with the `check` expression. The simple value should belong to one of the types: `()`, `int`, `float`, `decimal`, `string`, or  `boolean`.

```ballerina
public function main() returns error? {
    json j1 = {name: "Anne", age: 20, marks: {math: 90, language: 95}};
    string name = check j1.name;
    int age = check j1.age;
}
```

##### Improved lang library functions

Several changes and improvements have been introduced to the `ballerina/lang.value` lang library module.

###### New `ensureType` function

> This method can be used to check if a value belongs to the given type similar to the type cast expression. However, instead of panicking, this method returns an error if the type test fails.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This method can be used to check if a value belongs to the given type similar to the typecast expression. However, instead of panicking, this method returns an error if the type test fails.
```

Reviewer 4: @MaryamZi Should we change the above?

Reviewer 2: The spec seems to have this as two words, https://ballerina.io/spec/lang/master/#section_6.20, so I guess it is OK? Or we can just say "cast expression".

Reviewer 4: Ack. Lets keep it as it is then.
